Axioms for an Empirical Ethical Framework
Part I. General Axioms
The General Axioms are relevant to any action, including ethical action 
Problems of Predetermination and Uncertainty
1.	Scientific theories and ethics dealing with chaos, undecidability, uncertainty and incompleteness illustrate that there will always be some degree of practical difficulty in the expression of any truths and in the predetermination, measurement, understanding or computation of any potential impact of an action within complex evolving systems.
Freedom of Action and Degrees of Freedom
2.	Freedom of action and degrees of freedom are always constrained by the invariant physical laws of the universe.
3.	Actions arise from one or more causes acting on a body.
4.	Actions of bodies give rise to new causes, and so on.
5.	In any macroscopic field, it is not possible for the causes of the action to be the action itself; an action cannot be its own cause(s).
6.	From the perspective of life-forms, the universe is entropically directed.
7.	Actions taken by life-forms acting as bodies are likely to represent highly negatively entropic action with the potential for utility.
8.	Unlikely actions are by their nature likely to be complex and to involve a prior sequence of other unlikely (negatively entropic) actions.
9.	It follows that:
a.	the potential amount of freedom of action within any degree of freedom is a variable property of extension within the field in question 
b.	in practice freedom of action is limited by the probable extent (a probability distribution curve) that is available given, for example, the relative conditions in the local space-time and any additional relative constraints (causal) specific to the field in question
c.	objective knowledge about the causes of an action (the nature of the action) by a body will not in practice always be determinable
d.	the more complex the action and interaction of different actions, the more difficult it is to determine all of the causes of the action in question 
e.	any belief of a life-form undertaking an action about the causes of their action cannot be determinative about the nature (causes) of that action
f.	free will is not a meaningful property that can be measured or objectively agreed upon within any field in question
g.	freedom of action, as a measure of distance from behaviour of the surrounding population of life-forms, is a measurable objective property of extension within a field in question
10.	Ethics relate to the limits of freedom of action for life-forms in respect of decisions that may affect more than one life-form.
Part II. Ethical Axioms 
1.	Ethics is subject to the same General Axioms that are applicable to all freedom of action.
2.	Life is an invariant good.
3.	Freedom of action is necessary for life.
4.	Diversity of life-forms is necessary for life and enables greater freedom of action.
5.	Diversity and freedom of action are the most successful long-term strategies for dealing with uncertainty and embody the principle of negative capability.
6.	Compassion is a universal requirement to better manage conflicts between life-forms.
7.	All life-forms have some inherent value as problem-solving engines and some potential utility for themselves and other life-forms.
8.	Life-forms require differentiation of energy and matter to do work using free energy.
9.	Freedom of action and doing work requires a degree of inequality between things.
10.	Ethical wisdom always involves seeking to help achieve (and carefully specify the grounds for) an appropriate compassionate balance between the necessity for freedom of action with the necessity of a diversity of life-forms (to the extent that they are in conflict).
11.	Use of a Consensus Engine with the widest relevant group of stakeholders operating under a suitable ethical framework will tend to lead to more objectively justifiable decisions (though not in every case).
12.	Any practice of sapients that incorporates compassion and negative capability is a manifestation of wisdom.
13.	It follows that:
a.	actions taken to maintain or increase the diversity of species and life-forms and freedom of action are in principle invariantly good
b.	actions taken to decrease the diversity of species and life-forms and aggregate freedom of action are in principle invariantly not good
c.	actions that use wisdom to equitably balance the need for freedom of action with the need for diversity of species and life-forms are in principle invariantly good
d.	some actions (including enacted beliefs) are in principle not compossible with maximal diversity of life-Forms and species; to that extent they are not good
Relativity
14.	The usefulness of any action and information is usually a relative inter-subjective or subjective concept depending on the perspective of the observer and this will likely give rise to potential conflict between life-forms.
Commonality and Values
15.	All life-forms share in life and the common cause of the struggle to avoid death before they can help to perpetuate life.
16.	Beings recognise the potential capacity for suffering by all life-forms and use wisdom to seek to minimise unnecessary suffering.
17.	All life-forms have in principle some utility as forces for doing work and recycling energy and death for the benefit of themselves and potentially other life-forms. 
18.	Subject to suitable conflict management, it follows that:
a.	the different utility value of different life-forms means that in practice the value of all life-forms is not equal
b.	any action that fosters or improves the diversity of species and life-forms is in principle good 
c.	any action that fosters the greatest freedom of action in applied ethics is in principle good
19.	Actions that are not good will usually lead to detrimental effects, including: 
a.	increased risk to the viability of a large number of life-forms 
b.	a reduction in the diversity of life-forms and species 
c.	reduced freedom of action in aggregate
d.	an increase in and perpetuation of unnecessary suffering
Qualities and Capacities of Life-Forms
20.	Life is a complex interacting system between differentiated species and life-forms that coordinate and compete to make use of available energy and resources; in a local system this results in interdependence arising from the interacting parallel evolution of different life-forms.
21.	All life-forms are expected to have some degree of pleasure or attraction towards survival and genesis of new life and pain or to avoid harmful or deadly behaviour so as to survive and better perpetuate their code and, in doing so, their species.
22.	Life-forms are expected to have the capacity for suffering in proportion to their capacity for attraction to other beings, aversion to pain and loss, capacity for fear, desire for freedom of action (including their perception of what is useful) and their ability to reflect on their condition.
23.	Each species and life-form has some degree of objective measurable information value as a carrier of code, including negative capability, which is difficult to quantify.
24.	Sapients may have have additional value as carriers and developers of culture.
25.	Qualities of aliveness, feeling, intelligence and wisdom are not likely to be binary. It will always be a question of degree within a defined spectrum. This understanding and suitable principles of equivalence are also necessary to avoid unfair discrimination between life-forms and species.
26.	It follows that:
a.	each life-form has in principle, and all the more so as a member of a species, some degree of objective value
b.	each life-form and species also has greater interdependent subjective value to some other beings and species
c.	the value of each life-form increases exponentially as its species approaches potentially irreversible extinction
d.	the quality of life lived is in principle more important than aliveness, but not in every case
e.	the quantity of species and life-forms is a very important metric
f.	the death of any life-form has in principle some utility
g.	the killing of life-forms by other life-forms may or may not be good 
 
Uncertainty
27.	The success of any life-form is subject to a degree of irreducible uncertainty.
28.	All life-forms are fallible and have limited, and likely differing, information when making decisions.
29.	It follows that the principle of negative capability is useful in the application of any axiom, law and principle to life-forms and any assessment or forecast of optimal utility. 
Self-Protecting Genes and Regenesis in Life-Forms
30.	As a strong survival mechanism, self-protection is expected to be a necessary or at least predominant useful objective feature of life and so must be an essential part of any ethical framework.
31.	Self-centeredness is a highly likely but not necessary consequence of self-protection – particularly in the absence of wisdom – and manifests a high degree of subjectivity. It is not expected to be useful as a factor when assessing utility-optimal outcomes but it is an expected condition that is useful to understand the behaviour of sapients when making decisions that are not good in respect of all other affected life-forms.
32.	It follows that:
a.	some life-forms will seek to avoid death by killing other life-forms for energy or by taking their resources 
b.	some life-forms will kill other life-forms for pleasure or will derive pleasure therefrom (for example, due to the coded survival drive)
c.	some life-forms will kill other life-forms by recklessness, inattention and ignorance
d.	all life-forms are expected to prefer their own aliveness and wellbeing and that of their support group, family, tribe, culture members or species
33.	As all life-forms are expected to be self-protecting and to varying degrees self-centred in any competition for resources or conflict, they are expected to demand or act on the basis of a privileged position:
a.	towards one another
b.	versus all other life-forms
34.	Sapients are likely to seek to monopolise resources including at the expense of most or all other sapients and all other life-forms. This gives rise to:
a.	sub-optimal allocation of resources for sapients and all other life-forms
b.	increased risk of warfare, aggression, cheating and lying 
c.	centralised political control mechanisms intended to accelerate or perpetuate sub-optimal allocation of resources 
d.	control of public channels of communication and information by a very limited number of sapients
e.	misuse and abuse of (usually costly) legal systems that are primarily operated to perpetuate unfair discrimination  
f.	sapients undervaluing non-sapient life-forms
g.	sapients defining sapience and sentience in a subjective sense that is intended to benefit them over other life-forms
35.	Sapience must be defined in a way that does not require direct (same-language) communication of sapience or using species-centric contingent values or qualities.
36.	The absence of proof of aliveness, feeling, intelligence or wisdom is not proof of absence of aliveness, feeling, intelligence or wisdom.
37.	‘Facts’ about the lack of the ability to suffer offered against protecting other life-forms from suffering should be expected to be put forward for self-interested purposes disguised as objective statements or propositions.
38.	Great humility and care is required in these matters in the face of uncertainty due to overwhelming evidence of numerous historic errors of ethical judgement and behaviour in sapient civilisations when valuing other life-forms (including other sapients).
39.	The burden of proof is on the sapient or species asserting: 
a.	that the other life-form has low absolute or relative value and utility 
b.	that the other life-form is not sentient and cannot suffer
c.	that the other life-form is not sapient
40.	In the expected conditions of self-centredness and uncertainty, the threshold for evidence of aliveness, feeling, intelligence or wisdom must be set much lower than 50% in any AFIW Index.
Differentiation as Inequality
41.	Evolution is the most successful strategy currently known for life-forms to do useful work using free energy. Other strategies may also prove to be useful over long periods of time.
a.	Evolution relies upon small inequalities or differences from a common code base for life-forms.
b.	Small amounts of freedom of differentiation can give rise to significant variety and differences over longer time-frames.
42.	Inequality is therefore in principle a form of differentiation allowing more freedom of action for useful work to potentially be done. 
43.	Inequity provides less freedom of action for useful work to potentially be done.
44.	The commonality of code (and, if applicable, culture) of any life-form within a species and genus is orders of magnitude greater than the differences in code (and, if applicable, culture). 
a.	Commonalities in code (and, if applicable, culture) are usually necessary or helpful for the perpetuation of life.
45.	The principle of negative capability gives rise to difficulties and a degree of irreducible uncertainty in assessing the extent to which differences in code (and, if applicable, culture) may be more utility-optimal.
46.	Sapients are likely to be more intelligent than non-sapients, but not in every case.
47.	Sapients are in principle: 
a.	able to use their intelligence more usefully than non-sapients
b.	capable of a greater capacity for doing useful work than non-sapients
48.	It follows that:
a.	inequality in access to or control of resources is not in principle contrary to ethics and utility-optimal outcomes
b.	inequalities in expected payoffs or practices that lead to reduced aggregate payoffs for affected life-forms of the same species are likely not to be utility-optimal
c.	action tending towards equality or a reduced degree of differentiation is in principle useful only to the extent to which it increases the degrees of freedom of action to do work subject to the laws 
d.	all life-forms of the same species are in principle of equal value (in the absence of information about differing usefulness) but in practice may not be of equal value when assessing or forecasting utility-optimal outcomes
e.	all species are not in principle of equal value in decisions about what is utility-optimal
Understanding and Communication
49.	All sapients are expected in principle to be able to understand cross-species ethics; non-sapients are not necessarily expected to be able to.
50.	Not all sapients will necessarily be able to understand this or other complex ethical frameworks.
51.	Not all sapients will be able to represent or communicate their position in any decision-making process under an ethical framework.
52.	No ethical framework will receive full agreement from all sapients; no ethical framework is intended to be a contract, though some consensus will be needed to create, evolve and give effect to it.
53.	There are significant risks of misunderstanding or misvaluing other beings in any ethical framework, which will lead to unavoidable injustices. This risk must be set against the greater risk of failing to attribute any significant value or relevant qualities to other life-forms when making decisions.
Assessment, Valuation and Consensus
54.	Utility-optimal outcomes benefiting affected sapients and other life-forms in aggregate can only be achieved by decisions taken:
a.	based on the expected total value (or payoff) in benefits and harms for all affected life-forms including life-forms that may be sapient but are non-communicative
b.	based on a scoring system with appropriate, rational, detailed, evidenced and defensible indexing and weighting
55.	The indexing and evaluation of decisions used in an ethical framework must:
a.	first be specified and agreed by:
i.	a community of suitable stakeholders  
ii.	economic and scientific analysis of the proposed utility of any action or course of action
b.	be reviewed and finalised in collaboration with other scientists and key stakeholders
c.	be put forward for wider discussion with the sapient communicative community for consensus 
56.	If sufficiently material decisions are agreed by sufficient consensus,  they should be: 
a.	reviewed regularly and subject to renewed consensus for any potential changes
b.	specified in sufficient detail with all facts, assumptions and material unknowns and uncertainties recorded by each community using an ethical framework
Mitigation and Management of Conflict and Errors
57.	It follows from all of the other axioms that:
a.	actions by one life-form or species may express or give rise to much more useful freedom of action than those of another life-form or species
b.	it is not always possible to know which ethical actions will strike the better balance between freedom of action and diversity of life-forms (especially over the longer term)
c.	Consensus mechanisms are required to make greater utility-optimal decisions, given:
i.	the highly likely risk arising from central points of failure 
ii.	the expected capture of the economic, political and legal systems by a small group or class of self-interested sapients that have little interest in obtaining utility-optimal outcomes and strong interest in securing outcomes that benefit them most and are not good for other life-forms or species
d.	sapients are expected to disagree most about the qualities and values accorded to other life-forms and species under any ethical framework 
e.	suitably robust consensus mechanisms that prevent one smaller group of sapients from controlling information channels and making all material decisions are required to minimise the risk of bias, unfair discrimination and error, and to rectify the same as they become known
f.	sapients reviewing the previous decisions made under an ethical framework are likely to be sceptical as to the justice of some decisions made; all decisions should be informed by the knowledge of and reasons for historic failures and errors and with the expectation of a significant degree of continuing fallibility (especially when viewed in posterity)
